+++
title = "Research"
date = "2018-07-07"
sidemenu = "true"
description = "Projects and interests"
+++


#### Political Inequality

I'm currently working as a post-doc in the project [*Political Voice and Economic Inequality across Nations and Time*](https://politicalinequality.org/2017/09/21/new-project-political-voice-and-economic-inequality-across-nations-and-time/) led by dr. Joshua K. Dubrow. In this project I use my knowledge of cross-national surveys and methodology to investigate how economic and educational inequality translates into political marginalization – a topic of renewed relevance in the current turbulent times. I develop country-level measures of political inequality using data from various sources: survey data, administrative records, event data, and others. 

#### Survey Data Harmonization

As a Ph.D. student I have been working in a project at The Ohio State University and the Polish Academy of Sciences that created an ex-post harmonized database of 1721 national surveys from 22 international survey projects with almost 2.3 million respondents surveyed between 1966 and 2013 ([Survey Data Recycling project, SDR](dataharmonization.org)). We integrated these data with properties of the national surveys and country-level economic and political characteristics; the result is a large, complex multi-level data structure. In a new four-year National Science Foundation grant this database will almost quadruple in size after adding new survey project and waves, and harmonizing additional variables related to social capital and well-being. 

Beyond the opportunities that the SDR dataset creates for substantive research, I am particularly interested in the comparability of data obtained via *ex post* harmonization of cross-national surveys, including the comparability of survey aggregates (e.g., means, proportions), as well as in developing tools that facilitate management, processing, and analysis of large social science data, such as those created in the SDR project, as well as solutions for data sharing and dissemination.

The comparability of survey aggregates, i.e. the extent to which difference in sample aggregates reflect real differences or changes, or whether they are the effect of the variation in methodology and quality among compared surveys, has received relatively little scholarly attention. Variation in methodology and quality is present both between survey projects and between national surveys in the same project, and includes - among others - differences in sampling and in the measurement of the individual-level variable(s) in question. Meanwhile sample estimates such as means and proportions, as well as more complex measures of association, variability, and heterogeneity, are commonly used in social science research as country characteristics to describe and explain differences between countries and over time, often without establishing whether such sample estimates can be at all compared. Comparisons of sample estimates between countries and over time are also of interest to policy makers.

#### Ph.D. Dissertation in Sociology (2017)

My dissertation analyzes the links between democratic values, political trust, and protest participation, and the consequences of educational stratification of values, attitudes, and participation for democratization. I highlight in particular the concept of stratified modernity, which refers to the differences in the adoption of modern values across social strata. Modernity is stratified because of the differential exposure to education systems, which are a medium of spreading modern values and orientations, as well as expectations regarding legitimate political rule, across the globe. By emphasizing the role of education in shaping within-country distributions of values, and pointing to the consequences of the social stratification of protest participation, this dissertation provides new insight into the mechanisms through which modernization improves chances for democratization.

My dissertation relies on secondary analyses of survey data. I use a subset of the [Survey Data Recycling dataset](https://dataverse.harvard.edu/dataset.xhtml?persistentId=doi:10.7910/DVN/VWGF5Q) stemming from *ex post* harmonization of 14 cross-national survey projects, combined with country-level indicators of the quality of democracy and economic development, as well as methodological quality control variables. Modeled as a multi-level structure, with either individuals or country-years as the unit of analysis, this dataset allows me to test the consecutive stages of the
hypothesized mechanism while overcoming some of the major weaknesses of prior cross-national large-N empirical studies relating values and attitudes to democratization, primarily related to limited variation of democratic quality within the country sample and lack of consideration to intrasocietal processes when explaining macrolevel outcomes.

#### Master's thesis in Sociology (2014)

Given the constant increase in the share of Europe’s population made up of individuals with immigrant origin, understanding political engagement and attitudes among the migrant population becomes crucial for the stability of European regimes. This paper integrates theories of political participation with literature on immigrant incorporation to examine factors that shape trust in institutions among immigrants in Western Europe. Results of analyses using cross-national survey data from the European Social Survey and country-level indicators of quality of governance show that among immigrants trust in institutions is positively associated with the difference in quality of governance between the residence country and the country of origin, but the magnitude of these effects varies between the foreign-born and second generation migrants. Additionally, controlling for quality of governance, having former colony origin has a negative effect on trust. Surprisingly, adherence to Islam has a positive effect of political trust above and beyond other individual- or country-level factors. This striking finding may be partially due to selection dynamics, which could operate differently for migrants from different religious-cultural backgrounds. By improving the understanding of factors shaping levels of political trust, this research has practical implications for immigration and diversity-management policies in Western Europe.

#### Master's thesis in Cultural Studies of Central Eastern Europe (2009)

The thesis focuses on the social and religious history of today’s Kosovo in the first centuries of Ottoman rule, i.e. from the 15th until the 17th century. Starting from a description of political changes in the Western Balkans before and during the Ottoman conquest, I discuss their influence on the social situation of the population of today’s Kosovo and potential motives for conversions of Balkan Christians to Islam. The last chapter is devoted to the character of popular, folk religion in Ottoman Balkan provinces, and to the analysis of Sufism, the mystical dimension of Islam, which has played a significant role in the history of religious changes in the Western Balkans, including Kosovo. The main objective is to show how political changes in the late Middle Ages and under Ottoman rule influenced the social and religious structure of Kosovo, and result in the today’s character of faith among the country’s population.

#### Master's thesis in Economics (2007)

This paper compares and contrasts the treasury futures market at the Warsaw Stock Exchange in Poland and the Chicago Board of Trade in the United States. This comparative analysis sheds light on the factors that hinder the development of the treasury futures market in Poland and the associated opportunities for investment and hedging, in particular regulatory restrictions that limit market liquidity.